doc/tutorials/getting_started.md, before:

@insert-title:tutorials-getting-started

[TOC]

Once the NEML2 library is built following the [installation guide](@ref install), the immediate question is

> How do I evaluate a NEML2 material model?

## Downstream C++ project

NEML2 core capabilities are implemented as a _library_, not a _program_. As a library, it will be used by another C++ program to parse and evaluate a material model defined in an [input file](@ref tutorials-models-input-file). Boilerplate for the C++ program can be found in this [set of tutorials](#tutorials-models), and external project integration is documented in the [installation guide](@ref external-project-integration).

## The Runner

We acknowledge the common need to use NEML2 as a standalone program and therefore provide two convenient options for users to effectively use NEML2 as a standalone program, with the first option being the *NEML2 Runner*.

As documented in [build customization](@ref build-customization), the "runner" preset or the `NEML2_RUNNER` CMake option can be used to create a simple "runner" program for parsing, diagnosing, and running NEML2 material models.
```
cmake --preset runner -S .
cmake --build --preset runner
```

Once the runner is built (and/or installed), an executable named `runner` will be placed under the build directory (or the installation directory). Invoking the executable without any additional argument or with the `-h` or `--help` argument will print out the usage message:
```
Usage: runner [--help] [--version] [--diagnose] [--time] [--num-runs VAR] [--warmup VAR] input driver additional_args

Positional arguments:
  input            path to the input file
  driver           name of the driver in the input file
  additional_args  additional command-line arguments to pass to the input file parser [nargs: 0 or more]

Optional arguments:
  -h, --help       shows help message and exits
  -v, --version    prints version information and exits
  -d, --diagnose   run diagnostics on common problems and exit if any issue is identified
  -t, --time       output the elapsed wall time during model evaluation
  -n, --num-runs   number of times to run the driver [nargs=0..1] [default: 1]
  --warmup         number of warmup runs before actually measuring the model evaluation time [nargs=0..1] [default: 0]
```

## Python script

The other option to evaluate NEML2 material models is to use the NEML2 Python package. As mentioned in the [installation guide](@ref install), NEML2 also provides an _experimental_ Python package which provides bindings for the primitive tensors and parsers for deserializing and running material models. This [set of tutorials](#tutorials-models) describes the usage of the package.

Commit message:

Fix variable referencing bug
Wendy discovered a bug when a ScalarLinearInterpolation model is being used as a nonlinear parameter at multiple places. In that case, we issue a false-positive error saying the variable is referencing another variable multiple times.

This PR fixes that bug by relaxing that error checking to allow for repeated variable referencing iff the referee remains the same. The error message is also slightly improved to include more information.

The runner now supports subcommands to make it easier to diagnose models without a driver.

doc/tutorials/getting_started.md, after:

@insert-title:tutorials-getting-started

[TOC]

Once the NEML2 library is built following the [installation guide](@ref install), the immediate question is

> How do I evaluate a NEML2 material model?

## Downstream C++ project

NEML2 core capabilities are implemented as a _library_, not a _program_. As a library, it will be used by another C++ program to parse and evaluate a material model defined in an [input file](@ref tutorials-models-input-file). Boilerplate for the C++ program can be found in this [set of tutorials](#tutorials-models), and external project integration is documented in the [installation guide](@ref external-project-integration).

## The Runner

We acknowledge the common need to use NEML2 as a standalone program and therefore provide two convenient options for users to effectively use NEML2 as a standalone program, with the first option being the *NEML2 Runner*.

As documented in [build customization](@ref build-customization), the "runner" preset or the `NEML2_RUNNER` CMake option can be used to create a simple "runner" program for parsing, diagnosing, and running NEML2 material models.
```
cmake --preset runner -S .
cmake --build --preset runner
```

Once the runner is built (and/or installed), an executable named `runner` will be placed under the build directory (or the installation directory). Invoking the executable without any additional argument or with the `-h` or `--help` argument will print out the usage message:
```
Usage: runner [--help] [--version] {diagnose,inspect,run,time}

Optional arguments:
  -h, --help     shows help message and exits
  -v, --version  prints version information and exits

Subcommands:
  diagnose      Run diagnostics on a driver or a model from an input file.
  inspect       Summarize the structure of a model.
  run           Run a driver from an input file.
  time          Time the execution of a driver from an input file.
```
See the subcommand help messages for further details.

## Python script

The other option to evaluate NEML2 material models is to use the NEML2 Python package. As mentioned in the [installation guide](@ref install), NEML2 also provides an _experimental_ Python package which provides bindings for the primitive tensors and parsers for deserializing and running material models. This [set of tutorials](#tutorials-models) describes the usage of the package.
